---
layout: post
mathjax: true
comments: true
title: "Electrostatic Charging by Friction"
tags: physics, electricity, charges, "charging by friction"
date: 2023-02-12
---
[# Landsberg - Elementary Textbook of Physics Vol 2 - Mir - 1988](https://archive.org/details/LandsbergElementaryTextbookOnPhysicsVol2Mir1988)

## Chapter 1 Electric Charges

### 1.7.1. Why does dry and clear hair “stick” to a plastic comb (combing hair, we sometimes hear a slight crackling, and in a dark room small sparks can be seen between the hair and the comb).

The dry hair are good electrical insulators. When we use a plastic comb on dry hair, there is electrical charging by friction, with the comb and the hair acquiring opposite charges. Because the hair and the comb have opposite charges, they attract each other, that is they "stick". And while the charges are transferred between the comb and the hair, they lead to sparks and crackling. The sparks and crackling sound is due to very high electric fields, just as in case of a lightning strike. 



### 1.7.2. Press a sheet of paper against a warm tiled fire-place and rub the paper with your palms. It sticks to the tiles. When an attempt is made to remove it, a crackling sound is heard, and sparks can be observed between the paper and the fire-place in the dark. Ex­plain the phenomenon. Why is it impossible to perform this experiment with a cold fire­ place? Recall what has been said in this connection in Sec. 1.2.

The paper acquires a charge when we rub it with our palms. This charge allows the paper to stick to the tiles. The warm tiled fire-place has hot gas around it which is a good electrical conductor. When we remove it from the fire-place this charge on the paper is neutralised by the hot-air which is a conductor. In a cold fire-place, the air is an insulator hence such effects cannot be observed.
